Looking at the past tenses, the line in the past and the dot in the past, the line in the past is extremely regular
We only have a few odd irregular verbs for the line in the past.
Ser is one of them and we can remember
by thinking of an era.
So what is the base for sir as a line in the past?
Era.
Era, good.
So this means I was, you formal were, he, she, it
was as a line in the past.
How would you say we were?
Eramos.
Éramos, good.
The accent doesn't move.
Eramos.
They were or you guys were
Eran.
A new informal.
Eras.
Good.
We had the line in the past of ER.
which was a little bit like a mix between the abba ending that we have for R verbs for the line in the past and the IA ending that we have for er verbs in the line in the past.
So what was I was going from here?
Ipa.
Very good.
Iba.
We were going.
IPamus.
You informal
Ipas.
And they or you guys.
Ipan.
Iban.
Good.
And then we had ver to see.
How is I see in the present
They'll they'll and this extra e that it keeps for the I form in the present they're
carries over into the line in the past.
So I was seeing you, Fumwal were seeing, he she it was seeing is the So we were seeing
Deamos you informal and they
Good.
So the line in the past is a very safe tense.
We just have a few irregular verbs, but for the rest
We can be very certain that taking off the R and putting abba or taking off the RIR and putting I is going to give us the result that we want.
The point in the past is less regular, less reliable.
There are a group of verbs in the dot or the point in the past
Which are irregular but they all do something very similar.
Now most of the verbs in this group are got verbs
But not all of them.
Now, what these verbs do in the point in the past is that firstly the beginning bit of the verb.
So for example, if we have poder
That beginning bit pod changes.
And we already saw this.
We saw, for example, they were able was pudieron.
So that pod changes to pod.
Here it's a little change, but there are more drastic changes with other verbs.
So this is the first thing.
The base of the verb that is left once we take the endings off changes
Sometimes radically, sometimes a little bit like here from pod to pud.
The second thing that they do is that they use
A mixture of the point endings from R verbs and from R-Er verbs.
They use a mixture of the two endings from both sides.
but always the same mixture for each of these irregular verbs.
And the third thing they do is to not have the accent on the endings.
So firstly, let's revise the point in the past with ablar and komer.
Just to refresh what are these endings.
So we have ablar to speak, and I spoke is
Able.
Good.
And he spoke or she spoke or you fumel spoke?
A blah.
A bloh.
And then we had to eat, which was komer, and I ate
Komi.
And he ate or she ate or you fumulate, it ate.
A blo and then with commerits
Comio Comio Good Back to Ablar how was we spoke?
Ablamos Ablamus Good same as the present tense And they spoke
Ablaron.
And you informal spoke, which in the U informal version we hear that informal S and the informal T in the ending.
Ablaste.
Ablaste, good.
Back to comer, how is we eight?
Comemos.
Comimos.
They ate or you guys ate?
Comeron.
And you informal ate?
Comiste.
Very good.
So that's the panorama of our dot in the past.
But these irregular verbs use a mixture of these two groups for different endings in the point in the past.
For example, tener to have in the point in the past, the way that ten changes, that root.
changes.
We said that's the first thing that happens.
The ten of tener becomes tub.
T-U-V.
Tuf.
And I had is tube.
And he, she, it had is tuba.
So we're not accenting the endings.
TU We TU.
So where are these two endings coming from?
E and O?
Are they coming from the R verbs or from the R-Ir verbs?
R.
Good.
So we have tuwe and tuwe.
So these two endings for I and for he she at you fumel come from r and the rest come from er.
So how would you say we had with the point in the past?
Tuvimos.
And you informal
Tu viste.
And they tuvieron.
Tu vieron.
Good.
So now that we've worked our way through this one verb
All we need to do for the other ones is to find the base, the irregular base for the verb, and then we know what to do with it.
What was to be for states
Estar.
Now I was the point in the past from a star is estue.
So it's nice to look at the ner and the star together because we have tue for I had and estue for I was.
Estuve and I wasn't
No estuve.
Good.
He was, she was, you were, formal.
Estuvo.
Good.
We were
Estuvimos.
You were informally.
Estuviste.
Where were you?
They were, you guys were?
Where were you guys?
Donde estuvieron?
Good.
Donde estuvieron.
So whilst we have these irregular forms, which need a little bit more effort
Many times you can just use the line in the past instead.
So if you say something like non destuiste,
Where were you?
Until we're using a point in time.
So maybe it sounds like where were you in this precise moment when we needed you?
But even
Even so, we could still just use the line in the past to get around this irregular tense.
Now we don't want to avoid it forever.
Anything that we don't control of the language will end up controlling us.
Anything we are uncertain of that we don't take the control of will control us.
But many times you're in a conversation and you don't have time to find that irregular form.
And maybe you want to worry about it later and check
and think about what it was.
In that case, you can just turn to the line in the past, donde estabas, instead of donde estuiste.
So how would you say I had to go using this point in the past?
So how is I had using the point in the past?
Tuve.
Good.
So I had to go.
Tu ve keer.
Good.
So tuve keir you would want to use it if you meant that in one precise moment, you know, something happened and I had to go.
Tuekeir.
But you could also use the line in the past and not have any problem there if you wanted to avoid this irregular tense just to get the meaning across.
So you can just say tenia keir.
Which is regular to avoid using this irregular tense.
What was to say or to tell?
Desir.
Desir or contar, but n desir we are working with for now.
So this
becomes dich in the point in the past.
Dich.
D Ij.
Now if we follow what we did with the other verbs, we can find all of the different versions I said, he said
So let's work our way through it.
What is I said?
Tiehe.
Tieche.
He said.
Tycho.
Good.
We said
Tihimos.
Good.
So they are using the same endings, this group of irregular verbs.
A and O from the R group and then the rest of the endings from the R-Ir group for the point in the past